# Ownership

Rules governing memory management. Zero cost, compile time and managed by the
compiler (not the programmer).

## Stack vs Heap Allocated Memory

Stack:

- Stores known, _fixed size_ data
- Faster to store
  - OS doesn't need to search for memory to store the data, simply push onto
    the stack
- Faster to access
  - OS simply pops from top of stack
- Values passed into a function call are stored on the stack
  - Including _pointers_ to heap allocation data
  - Popped off the stack when function exits

Heap:

- Stores unknown or variable size data
- _Allocation_
- Slower to store
  - OS has to search for memory to store the data and perform bookkeeping operations
    ready for the next allocation
- Slower to access
  - Requires following a pointer to the allocated memory location

Managing heap data is the goal of the Rust's ownership model.

## Ownership Rules

1. Each value has a variable representing it's _owner_
2. There can be only _one_ owner at any given time
3. When the owner goes out of _scope_, the value is dropped
   - Memory returned to the OS using the `drop` function

## `String` Type

String _literals_ are immutable, known at compile time and therefore **hard-coded**
into the final executable.

The `String` type is _heap_ allocated, to support a mutable and growable piece of text
that is unknown at compile time.

- Memory request from OS at runtime
- Memory must be returned to the OS once finished with

```rust
{
    let s = String::from("hello"); // s is valid from here onwards, memory has been allocated on the heap
    // use s
} // s is out of scope and is therefore invalid (memory returned to the OS)
```

## Move

Transfer of ownership of a piece of data from one variable to another:

```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1; // Ownership of the String transferred to s2, s1 is *no longer* valid
// Using s1 here will cause a compiler error
```

The pointer to the location on the heap where the `String` is stored and other metadata (length and capacity) are copied to `s2`. The underlying memory on the heap
**is not copied**. `s1` is invalidated.

Rust **never automatically deep copies data**.

- Automatic copying is shallow and therefore cheap in runtime performance

## Clone

_Trait_ to implement **deep copying** of data:

```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1.clone();

// s1 is still valid as underlying heap data was copied
println!("s1 = {}, s2 = {}", s1, s2);
```

## Copy

Trait to copy **stack-only** data during re-assignment.

- Previous assignments are valid
- Size of values is known at compile time -> cheap

```rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;

// x is still valid as integers are Copy
println!("x = {}, y = {}", x, y);
```

# References and Borrowing

## Rules

1. At any given time _either_ **one mutatble** reference or **any number of immutable** references for a given variable can exist.
2. References _must_ always be _valid_
   - Variable cannot go out of scope

Immutable reference:

```rust
fn main() {
    let s1 = String::from("hello");

    let len = calculate_length(&s1);

    println!("The length of '{}' is {}.", s1, len);
}

fn calculate_length(s: &String) -> usize {
    s.len()
}
```

Mutable reference:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("hello");

    change(&mut s);
}

fn change(some_string: &mut String) {
    some_string.push_str(", world");
}
```

```rust
let mut s = String::from("hello");

let r1 = &s;
let r2 = &s;
println!("{} and {}", r1, r2);

let r3 = &mut s; // r1 and r2 are now *invalid*
// using r1 or r2 from here on will cause a compiler error
println!("{}", r3);
```

# Slices

Reference a **contiguous sequence** of elements in a collection _rather_ than the whole collection.

- Reference a portion of the collection

```rust
let s = String::from("Hello, world!");
let hello = &s[..5]; // "hello", type &str
let world = &s[6..11]; // "world", type &str
let hello_world = &s[..] // "Hello, world!", type &str

let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
let slice = &a[1..3]; // [2, 3], type &[i32]
```

Further examples in `projects/slices`.

String literals are slices

- Point to a specific location in the compiled binary

```rust
let s = "Hello, world!"; // type &str
```
