# Smart Pointers

Data structures that _act_ like pointers, but also have additional capabilities e.g. reference counting

Usually implemented using structs which implement `Deref` and `Drop` traits

- 'Ordinary' structs don't implement these traits

## Using `Box<T>` to Point to Data on the Heap

Box allows storing data on the heap rather than the stack.

- _Data_ stored on heap
- _Pointer_ stored on stack

Used:

1. Type whose size can't be known at compile time but need to use a value of the type in a context that requires an exact size.
2. Large amount of data to transfer ownership of but _don't_ want to copy the data
3. Trait objects (see chapter 17)

Allows immutable or immutable borrows checked at compile time.

### Enabling Recursive Types with Boxes

Example of point 1 above.

See `projects/cons-list`

## Treating Smart Pointers Like Regular References with the `Deref` Trait

`Deref` trait controls the behaviour of the dereference, `*`, operator.

See `projects/mybox`

### Deref Coercion

Convenience performed by the compiler to convert a reference that implements `Deref` into a reference to a type that `Deref` can convert the _original_ type into.

- Automatic when passing a reference to a type's value as an argument to a function or method that doesn't match the parameter type in the function or method definition.

`DerefMut` is used to define implement dereferencing for mutable references.

## Running Code on Clean-up with the `Drop` Trait

See `projects/drop`

`Drop` trait defines what happens when a value is about to go _out of scope_.

- Can be used like Python context managers to release file handles, close network connections e.t.c.

`Box<T>` customises `Drop` to deallocate the space on the heap that is pointed to by the box.

## `Rc<T>`, the Reference Counted Smart Pointer

Also see `projects/cons-list`

`Rc<T>` enables **multiple ownership** by keeping track of the number of references to a value (i.e. whether it's still in use). Zero reference = safe to clean up the value without leaving any invalid pointers.

Used when allocating data on the heap for _multiple_ parts of a program to read and the last part to use the data _cannot be known at compile time_.

- If it could be known at compile time, then the last part could just be made the owner and a `Rc<T>` wouldn't be required.

Allows only immutable borrows checked at compile time.

**Single-threaded only**

- See chapter 16 for multi-threaded reference counting

## `RefCell<T>` and the Interior Mutability Pattern

**Interior mutability** = design pattern that allows mutation of data _even_ when there are _immutable_ references to that data.

- Uses `unsafe` code _inside_ a data structure, _wrapped_ in a **safe API**

### Enforcing Borrowing Rules at Runtime with `RefCell<T>`

Uses interior mutability.

`RefCell<T>` enforces singe data ownership borrowing invariants **at runtime**

- Causes a panic if broken

Used when code follows the memory-safe borrowing rules but in such a way that the compiler cannot guarantee it.

- If the compiler can guarantee it, _always_ use a `Box<T>` instead

Allows mutable or immutable borrows checked at _runtime_.

- Can mutate the value _inside_ the `RefCell<T>` _even_ when the `RefCell<T>` is immutable

See `projects/mock-objects`

### Having Multiple Owners of Mutable Data by Combining `Rc<T>` and `RefCell<T>`

Also see `projects/cons-list`
