# Using Threads to Run Code Simultaneously

Rust standard library implements OS threading (**1:1**).

- _Not_ green threads (**M:N**)
- Green threads require a larger language runtime to provide thread management support, Rust aims to have as small a runtime as possible
  - Small enough to be generally be considered a language with "no runtime"

See `projects/thread-basics`

## Using Message Passing to Transfer Data Between Threads

Approach to safe concurrency: "Do not communicate by sharing memory; instead, share memory by communicating"

Rust provides _channels_ for message passing concurrency

- i.e. Go channels, Clojure channels, Haskell Chan/BoundedChan etc.

See `projects/channels`

# Shared-State Concurrency

Rust's type system and ownership rules make sharing memory between threads easier to do safely and correctly than in other languages.

## Using Mutexes to Allow Access to Data from One Thread at a Time

Require two invariants to be upheld in order to work:

- The lock is _always_ acquired before using the shared data.
- After finishing with the data, the lock _must_ be released in order to allow other threads to acquire it.

Rust enforces these and helps prevent incorrect usage through the `Mutex<T>` _smart pointer_.

See `projects/mutexes`

### Atomic Reference Counting with `Arc<T>`

`Arc<T>` allows _thread-safe_ multiple ownership of data.

- `Rc<T>` is _not_ thread safe as each call to `clone` uses simple addition/subtraction without concurrency primitives to track the number of references to it.

`Arc<T>` uses `std::sync::atomic` to atomically update it's reference counter in a thread-safe manner.

The additional thread-safety mechanisms mean `Arc<T>` _does_ have a runtime performance penalty.

- Only use when needed

See `projects/mutexes`

# Extensible Concurrency with the `Sync` and `Send` Traits

`std::marker::{Sync, Send}` marker traits.

- `Send` allows _transference of ownership_ between threads
  - Ensures that you can never _accidentally_ send a value across a thread unsafely.
    - e.g. `Rc<T>` is not `Send` and will not compile if sent across a thread
  - Any type composed entirely of `Send` types is itself automatically marked as `Send`
  - Most Rust primitive types are `Send`
    - Except raw pointers (chapter 19)
- `Sync` allows _access_ from multiple threads
  - Any type `T` is `Sync` if `&T` is `Send`
    - e.g. the _reference_ can be safely sent across threads
    - e.g.`Rc<T>` and `RefCell<T>` are _not_ `Sync`
      - `Rc<T>` due to it's non-atomic reference counting (same as why it's not `Send`)
      - `RefCell<T>` due to the runtime borrow checking that is not thread safe
  - Any type composed entirely of `Sync` types is itself automatically marked as `Sync`
  - Most Rust primitive types are `Sync`

**Implementing `Send` and `Sync` manually is unsafe**.

- See chapter 19
- Implementing new concurrent types that are not entirely composed of `Send` and `Sync` types required careful thought to uphold the safety guarantees that `Send` and `Sync` imply.
