# Rust vs OOP

For all parts, see `projects/rust-vs-oop`

> Object-oriented programs are made up of objects. An object packages both data and the procedures that operate on that data. The procedures are typically called methods or operations.
> -- Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software by Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides (Addison-Wesley Professional, 1994)

By _this definition_, Rust is object oriented:

- Structs/enums have data
- `impl` blocks provide methods on structs/enums

## Encapsulation

OOP typically provides access modifiers to determine the visibility of an item (usually class members) e.g. `private`, `protected`,`public` etc.

`pub` keyword in Rust provides encapsulation.

- Determines which items should be public
- Everything private by default

## Polymorphism

Code that can work with data of _multiple_ types.

In OOP this is _typically_ associated (and implemented) with _inheritance_, however polymorphism is a much more general concept that this.

- Inheritance includes **implementation sharing** which can lead to other problems

Rust provides **bounded parametric polymorphism**.

- _Generics_ to abstract over different possible types
- _Trait bounds_ to impose constraints on _what_ those types must provide
- e.g. Haskell type classes

# Using Trait Objects That Allow for Values of Different Types

Trait objects allow polymorphism over _behaviour_ of types instead of the concrete types themselves e.g. not "this takes an `i32`, `i64` or a `f64`" but "this takes any type which implements a trait".

- Generic type parameters are substituted for **one** concrete type at a time
- Trait objects allow for **multiple** concrete type to fill in for the trait object at runtime

Trait objects _point_ to:

- An instance of a type implementing a specific trait
- Look up table used to look up methods on that type at runtime

Create a trait object using a pointer (`&`, `Box<T>` etc.) and the `dyn` keyword - `Box<dyn MyTrait>`

- See chapter 19 for _why_ a pointer is needed

Use **dynamic dispatch** at runtime to determine which concrete methods to call as the compiler cannot know which concrete types will be used.

- As opposed to the _static dispatch_ provided by monomorphisation of generic type parameters

- Introduces some _runtime overhead_

Trait objects must be **object safe**

## Object Safety

For a trait to be object safe, all methods defined in a trait must satisfy:

- Return type is not `Self`
- No generic type parameters

See https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/0255-object-safety.md
