# Unsafe Rust

Unsafe Rust allows the use of some operations that the Rust compiler cannot ensure are memory safe and thus normally does not allow. It permits programs to:

1. Dereference a raw pointer
2. Call an unsafe function or method
3. Implement an unsafe trait
4. Access fields of `union`s

**Does not disable the borrow checker or Rust's other safety checks!**

- References will still be checked
- Only gives access to the above four features that are not checked for memory safety

Does not mean that code within `unsafe` blocks are necessarily dangerous or memory unsafe - only that the _compiler cannot guarantee it's safety or correctness_.

- The _programmer_ must uphold the invariants which make allow the `unsafe` code to be used in a memory safe manner

Isolating the unsafe code to `unsafe` blocks makes investigating memory issues simpler.

- i.e. if some Rust code has memory issues, it'll be in the `unsafe` block(s)
- Best to minimise the amount of unsafe code and keep `unsafe` blocks small

Isolate `unsafe` blocks by wrapping in a _safe_ abstraction layer with a _safe_ API.

- Prevents the use of `unsafe` from 'leaking' out

## Dereferencing a Raw Pointer

`*const T`, `*mut T` = immutable, immutable raw pointer

- `*` is part of the type name, _not_ the dereference operator
- _immutable_ = pointer can't be directly assigned to after being dereferenced

- Allowed to ignore borrowing rules
  - Both immutable and mutable pointers to the same location allowed
  - Multiple mutable pointers to the same location allowed
- Aren't guaranteed to point to _valid memory_
- Allowed to be **null**
- Don't implement automatic cleanup

```rust
let mut num = 5;

// Can *create* raw pointers in safe code, but cannot *dereference* them
// Note: These both point to the *same* memory location
let r1 = &num as *const i32;
let r2 = &mut num as *mut i32;

unsafe {
    // Dereference raw pointers
    println!("r1 is: {}", *r1);
    println!("r2 is: {}", *r2);
}
```

## Creating a Safe Abstraction over Unsafe Code

```rust
use std::slice;

/// Re-implementation of `std::slice::split_at_mut` which divides a mutable
/// slice into two at a given index.

fn split_at_mut(slice: &mut [i32], mid: usize) -> (&mut [i32], &mut [i32]) {
    let len = slice.len();
    let ptr = slice.as_mut_ptr();

    // Ensures that the split index is within the bounds of the slice and that
    // the following unsafe block doesn't enter invalid memory
    assert!(mid <= len);

    // This requires borrowing from two *different* parts of the slice at the
    // same time. This is safe given that the index to split is within the
    // bounds of the slice. However, Rust cannot know this and thus would only
    // see two simultaneous mutable borrows and produce a compiler error.
    // Unsafe is required to allow these two mutable borrows from the slice.
    unsafe {
        (slice::from_raw_parts_mut(ptr, mid),
         slice::from_raw_parts_mut(ptr.offset(mid as isize), len - mid))
    }
}
```

# Advanced Traits

## Specifying Placeholder Types in Trait Definitions with Associated Types

**Associated types** connect a type placeholder with a trait such that the trait method definitions can use the placeholder type in their signatures.

- Implementor of the trait specifies the _concrete_ type

`Iterator` trait has an associated type named `Item`

- The type the iterator is iterating _over_

See `Counter` struct in `projects/iterators` for an example from previous chapter.

## Default Generic Type Parameters and Operator Overloading

**Default generic type parameters** eliminate the need for implementors to specify a concrete type in cases where the default type will work.

`<PlaceholderType=ConcreteType>`

`std::ops` module defines traits for certain operators which can be overloaded.

- Rust doesn't support arbitrary operator overloading

See `projects/Overloading`

# Advanced Types

## Creating Type Synonyms with Type Aliases

Give an existing type another name.

```rust
type Kilometers = i32;

// Type alias does not create a *new* type -> adding a value of the un-aliased
// type will still work
let x: i32 = 5;
let y: Kilometers = 5;

println!("x + y = {}", x + y);
```

Used to reduce repetition of long type signatures and make the intent of a value clearer.

**Does not** provide additional type checking

`std::io::Result<T>` is an alias for `Result<T, std::io::Error>`

## The Never Type that Never Returns

`!` = _empty_ type (often called the never type in Rust).

- Used in place of a return type when a function **never returns**

```rust
fn my_infinite_loop() -> ! {
    while true {
        println!(".");
    }
}
```

`!` can be _coerced into any other type_.

- `match` arms must all return the same type. The code below compiles because the `Err` branch returns `continue` which has a value of `!`. The type of `guess` is `u32` as expected because the compiler knows that `!` can never have a value.

```rust
let guess: u32 = match guess.trim().parse() {
    Ok(num) => num,
    Err(_) => continue,
};
```

## Dynamically Sized Types and the `Sized` Trait

**DSTs/unsized types** allow code to be written where the size of values can only be known at runtime.

`Sized` trait indicates whether or not a type's size is known at compile time.

To use a DST, it _must_ be done so behind a **pointer** of some kind along with **metadata** indicating it's size.

- The sizes of these types (`usize`) are known at compile time

This is required because:

- Rust needs to know how much memory to allocate at compile time for _any_ value of a given type
- All values of the _same_ time must use the same amount of memory

`str` is a DST and as such is always used behind a pointer (usually `&str`). This won't compile:

```rust
let s1: str = "Hello there!";
let s2: str = "How's it going?";
```

If it were to compile, both `s1` and `s2` would have to be the same size as they both have the same type `str`. However they are not the same size, 12 and 15 bytes, so Rust cannot know how much memory to allocate for them. Using pointers means that Rust allocates space for two `usize`s - one to point to the data and one for the size of the `str`:

```rust
//
let s1: &str = "Hello there!";
let s2: &str = "How's it going?"
```

# Advanced Functions and Closures

## Function Pointers

Pass _regular_ functions to other functions (higher order)

`fn` = _function pointer_ type

- Functions coerce to the type `fn`
- Not the closure _trait_ `Fn`

```rust
fn add_two(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 2
}

fn do_twice(f: fn(i32) -> i32, arg: i32) -> i32 {
    f(arg) + f(arg)
}

fn main() {
    let answer = do_twice(add_two, 5);

    assert_eq!(answer, 14);
    println!("The answer is: {}", answer);
}
```

Function pointers implement _all_ of the closure traits -> can be used as an argument to a function that expects a closure:

- `Fn`
- `FnMut`
- `FnOnce`

Initialise a tuple struct:

```rust
enum Status {
    Value(u32),
    Stop,
}

let list_of_statuses: Vec<Status> =
    (0u32..20)
    .map(Status::Value)
    .collect();
```

Tuple struct initialisers are implemented as functions returning an instance that’s constructed from their arguments

## Returning Closures

Return using a trait object.

- Closures are represented by traits, not a concrete type (can't return `fn`)

```rust
fn returns_closure() -> Box<dyn Fn(i32) -> i32> {
    Box::new(|x| x + 1)
}
```

This won't compile because Rust doesn't know how much space is required to store the closure:

```rust
// i.e. a closure is *not* of type fn
fn returns_closure() -> Fn(i32) -> i32 {
    |x| x + 1
}
```

# Macros

Form of **metaprogramming**

- e.g. LISP macros, Clojure macros, C preprocessor macros etc.

Must define macros/bring them into scope **before** being called in a file.

## Declarative Macros with `macro_rules` for General Metaprogramming

"macros by example"

`macro_rules!`

Compare literal source code to patterns and replace with the associated code in the match arm.

`#[macro_export]` = Annotation to make the macro available whenever the containing crate is brought into scope.

**Simplified** example of the `vec!` macro:

```rust
#[macro_export]
macro_rules! vec {
    // `$()` = capture values for use within the replacement code
    // Match 0 or more Rust expressions, binding each to `$x`
    ( $( $x:expr ),* ) => {
        {
            let mut temp_vec = Vec::new();
            // Generate code within `$()* for each match `$x` in the pattern
            $(
                temp_vec.push($x);
            )*
            temp_vec
        }
    };
}

let x = vec!(2, 4, 6);

// Expands to:

let x = {
    let mut temp_vec = Vec::new();
    temp_vec.push(2);
    temp_vec.push(4);
    temp_vec.push(6);
    temp_vec
};
```

## Procedural Macros for Generating Code from Attributes

Accept code as input, **operate on the code** and return some code as output.

- Instead of match & replace performed by declarative macros

Three types:

- Custom derive
- Attribute-like
- Function-like

Definitions must be in their own crate with a crate type of `proc-macro = true`

- Technical reasons not explained in the book as hoping to be removed

### Custom Derive

Provide default implementations of traits/functions on structs and enums.

See `projects/hello_macro`

### Attribute-like

Allow creation of _new attributes_.

- As opposed to generating code _for_ the `derive` attribute with custom derive

### Function-like

Look like function calls but are more powerful (unknown arity etc.)

For example, a macro to check that some SQL is syntactically correct could look like:

```rust
// Parses the SQL and panics on invalid syntax
let sql = sql!(SELECT * FROM posts WHERE id=1);
```

Defined as:

```rust
#[proc_macro]
pub fn sql(input: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
    // Parse SQL...
}
```
