# Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable Applications

## Reliability

Faults/errors in the system

- Hardware faults
- Software errors
- Human errors

## Scalability

System's ability to cope with _increased load_

### Load

Load is described by _load parameters_ and **depends on the architecture of the system**:

- Req/s to a web server
- Database read:write ratio
- Number of simultaneous active users
- Cache hit rate

Performance metrics depend on the goals of the system i.e. :

- Throughput
- Response time

How is the performance of the system affected by increasing a load parameter?

How much do system resources need to be increased to keep performance unchanged when a load parameter is increased?

Measure using **percentiles**:

- Average (arithmetic mean) doesn't indicate how many times the value was _actually_ experienced i.e. the average response time for a client doesn't indicate how many users experienced it.

**Head-of-line blocking** = Queuing delay in network traffic, first request is slow -> blocks other incoming requests.

Architecture of systems at large scale is **higly specific** to the application.

- 100000 req/s of 1kB each is **very different** to 3 req/min at 2GB each despite the same _throughput of data_

Scalable architectures make _assumptions_ about the rate of different load parameters.

- Inform which scaling approaches are appropriate

## Maintainability

**Operability** = Ops teams keep systems running.

**Simplicity** = Easy for new engineers to understand the system -> remove complexity.

- Good abstractions
  - Remove accidental complexity (not inherent to the problem being solved, arises from implementation)

**Evolvability** = Easy for engineers to change the system.
