# Machine Types

Fixed-width numeric types matching those that most modern CPUs implement
directly in hardware.
- `u8`, `u16` etc.

*Machine word* = size of an address on the machine that code runs on.

Signed integer types (`i8`, `i16` etc.) use *two's complement*.

`u8` generally used for **byte values**
- e.g. reading from file/socket -> stream of `u8`s

Debug builds check for integer overflow
- Release builds **do not**

Use specific methods for **wrapping arithmetic**:

```rust
let x = big_number.wrapping_add(1);
```

## Floating-Point Types

**IEEE** single & double-precision floating-point types `f32`, `f64`
- IEEE 0754-2008 spec

Rust performs almost **no implicit numeric conversions**
- If a function require an `f64` it must be passed an `f64` explicitly

## Tuples

Hold multiple values of assorted types e.g. `("Hello", 1234, 'c')`

**Unit** type/empty tuple `()` represents no meaningful value to carry.
- Used when context requires some sort of type though no value is meaningful.
- e.g. a side-effectful function that returns no value

## Pointer Types

Rust is designed to keep *allocations* to a minimum
- Values are *nested* by default
  - e.g. `((0, 0), (1440, 900))` is stored as 4 *adjacent integers*
    - Would be multiple pointers to separate memory locations in Java for example

- Needs to use pointer types *explicitly* when values need to point to other
values

### References

Basic pointer type.
- Point to **any value, anywhere** (stack or heap).

`&x` = reference to `x` - **borrows** `x`.

`*p` = value that `p` points to.

No automatic resource freeing when dropped out of scope.

**Never null**

### Boxes

Create heap allocated data.

Memory is freed when a `Box` is dropped out of scope.

```rust
{
  let tup = ("Hello", 1234);
  let b = Box::new(tup); // heap allocate a tuple
  // do something with b in scope
}
// b is dropped and memory is freed
```

### Raw Pointers

`*mut T`/`*const T`

Rust does not track what is pointed to
- Like pointers in C++
- May be null
- May point to memory that has been freed
- May point to memory that now contains a value of different type


Can only **dereference within `unsafe` blocks**.

### Slices

`[T]`

Region of array of vector.

**Always** passed by reference as a **fat pointer** - two word value containing:
- Pointer to first element
- Number of elements in the slice
